hello and welcome to topcast and my next
in the series of questions for david
this is number nine
about the nature of mind and personhood
to some extent and what makes people
unique this is a real interest of mine i
made a video called the nexus which was
an exploration of what i think we know
from various angles about what the
nature of personhood is certainly it's
the case that we are these creative
entities and because of computational
universality it must be the case that we
can
program computers to be creative but
whatever this program is is going to be
very different to any existing program
and david's going to touch on that in
his answer today but this program
remains utterly elusive we do not know
how it is that we generate explanations
or in shorthand how it is that we're
creative in my nexus video i
hypothesized that personal identity
might come into this in some way because
there is this
some not entirely a mystery in the to
the same degree but certainly it is a
spectacular insight into the nature of
reality that particles and indeed all
large complex objects including
ourselves have fungible instances in
other universes which differentiate over
time and so this has a real effect on
how we should view the nature of
personhood given the truth of the
everett interpretation the multiverse
vision of quantum theory and so because
we know that we have these fungible
instances that interfere that
differentiate sometimes can
differentiate sometimes that perhaps
there's something to be said here for
the interaction between physics at that
level and whatever the computation is
that's going on in our minds i don't
know pure speculation but see my nexus
video for that what i really loved about
this
question to david or rather the answer
from david i should say
is that he talks about
consistency and whether or not and to
what extent people can be consistent
should we strive for consistency
i suppose so but can we could this
inconsistency that exists in our minds
this constant state of problems these
contradictions that we live with could
this just be part of the reason why we
are special unique different to
everything else that exists that we know
of we are the thing that brings other
things into being that otherwise would
not have come into being if it was just
laws of physics mandating everything in
a deterministic way those laws do
mandate things in a deterministic way
but they're not the only things that
determine stuff and what happens nor of
course most importantly
are the laws of physics the best
explanation for everything that happens
at all moments in time there is
something absolutely unique about human
beings
we continue to explore this we're not
just on the continuum with other animals
just a slightly smarter example of the
chimpanzee i keep on hearing this we are
qualitatively different
without further ado let's get into the
next question with david well this all
raises the fact that
there is this creativity going on this
creation of
concepts in order to try and come to
better understand the world
that is the uniquely creative capacity
of the human mind and mind itself how do
you understand the nature of mind i
sometimes think of it as
this abstraction i think you've said
this to me it's a it's a it's a it's a
funny kind of abstraction it's an
abstraction that itself needs to be
instantiated in matter but also needs to
be running it can't just be like any
other piece of knowledge which you can
transmit from one place to another in
different physical forms and that's one
way of understanding what knowledge is
it allows itself to continue to persist
over time
and to get itself copied to get itself
replicated but our mind a human mind
this thing that is enabling the creation
of this knowledge
it itself
is
an unusual kind of abstraction how do
you think of it at the moment yes so
it's an unusual kind of of knowledge so
we have yet another
classification
a mind is a kind of a kind of knowledge
you might say but it's a kind of
knowledge that doesn't only have to be
instantiated but as you have just said
it has to be running now what does that
mean
running how fast
running in what because uh
running in the wrong kind of computer
would
make it gibberish
or in a kind of computer that has the
wrong mapping to to reality we don't
know how it works we don't know how the
mind so the mind is characterized by
creativity i think we can go that far at
least the human mind is characterized by
creativity but we don't know what
creativity is we don't know what the
distinction is between a computer
program
that is running creatively and one that
is not running creatively
uh one day we will know but we don't
know yet i think also there are and
again
minds that minds exist is common sense
even though we don't know how they work
or what specifically they are
so
more recent ideas that maybe minds don't
exist
that had to be invented too
it is not at all common sense and it
doesn't at all follow from any good
philosophy but we don't know
and uh
one of the things i think that that is a
misconception that dates from
a very long time ago is is that a mind
is like mostly consistent
that it consists of
the ideas in the mind
are
mostly consistent and when they're
inconsistent that's a kind of emergency
and and we have to fix that because we
have because that does that that means
that it's not a proper mind really
um it's it's uh contains inconsistencies
rather and that therefore that's no
different from a load of propositions
written down on a piece of paper i don't
think that's true at all i i think a
better way to think of the mind is as a
set of problems and a problem consists
of conflicting theories
so uh or or rather a problem is is more
like some conflicting theories that we
have noticed because
we don't
really think of something as a problem
unless it's giving rise to some thought
so
uh but but there must be ideas that are
conflicting with each other
[Music]
before we have noticed it
and so the mind i think of it as sort of
massive tangled
ideas which are
largely inconsistent
the parts of it which we have sorted out
into a kind of consistency are a
minority
that are currently not
uh giving rise to any thought they they
might be invoked in some
thought that's about some other
inconsistency
but
the part of the mind that is thinking is
full of inconsistency and
so therefore a model of the mind that
thinks of the mind as a set of
consistent propositions
with occasional inconsistencies that we
then fix it it is uh i i i think very
far from the truth
it's it's not a set of consistent ideas
and it's not a set of propositions
because propositions have a definite
truth value they each proposition is
either true or false
and it has a perfectly definite meaning
if it has a meaning
whereas the ideas in minds
don't have a definite meaning and
they're not
precisely true or false
we can make them have as sharp a meaning
as our current problem situation
requires
that's what we should be aiming for and
we can make them as consistent as the
current problem situation requires
and we're striving you talked earlier
about about uh truth we're striving to
make them as true as the current problem
situation requires yes so it sounds that
whatever the nature of the mind is in a
computational sense has to be
radically different to any other kind of
program that we've hitherto encountered
because all those other programs are
written
in such a way that it's proposition
after proposition perhaps one following
from another it's an algorithm of a kind
and these statements need to be
consistent or the computer program
itself isn't going to run but you're
saying that
it's possibly the case that
underlying this uniquely creative
capacity of the human mind is something
that is quite the mirror image of that
in in at least some respects
um
and maybe this is this is what is needed
in order to uh go some way to explaining
what's going on here with um
creativity or another way
that you've put that in the beginning of
infinity is of course
explanatory universality
this idea that
even if there were other kinds of
creativity prior to us what we have
is a kind of creativity which allows us
to
create knowledge which is going to be
able to solve problems in principle
about anything that exists in the
physical universe